On Sun, 2015-10-18 at 23:39 +0200, Arek Bulski wrote:

> I read an interview where you said that disks nowadays guarantee
> atomic sector writes. I am inclined to believe that. However, I
> stumbled upon some comments on LWN saying that its all baloney because
> electronics outside the disk can fail before the disk, due to power
> loss, and therefore pass corrupted data to disk. Is there some
> citation that could authoritatively confirm one way or another?

Both can be true; though the exact characteristics of (especially
consumer-grade) devices are often not well-specified and written down.
But generally most disks can guarantee atomic writes *if* the write
actually makes media, and *if* there are no other failures anywhere in
the memory or IO chain.

But as always, your guarantees are only as good as the weakest link in
the chain.  If power fails, you also have writeback caches to worry
about; and disks are often fairly relaxed about when they have made
writes persistent, in order to gain performance advantages.  There are
ways to ensure persistence via disabling of writeback caching, use of
barriers and IO flags to force writes to media, etc; but guarantees vary
from disk to disk, especially for consumer devices.

Also a power supply will generally lose voltage gradually, not all at
once.  I've certainly heard anecdotally that this can cause soft memory
errors from DRAM before it gets to the point where the system is fully
powered-down --- DRAM is very much an analogue technology these days so
can be vulnerable to noisy or lowered voltage.

There are also a number of recent research papers on error rates of disk
data --- for very large storage arrays, simply getting the wrong data
back becomes increasingly likely.  There are checksum techniques to
guard against this sort of thing to some extent.

The extent to which a particular system copes with all these failure
modes is likely to be down to just how much attention the manufacturer
of each part of the system has paid to them.

> For disclosure, I am slowly pursuing a PhD with my own filesystem
> being the topic. Atomic writes are an important issue for me.

Computers are very complex systems.  Full data integrity depends on
nothing being corrupt anywhere --- not in CPU, not in cache, not in main
memory, nor in any of the motherboard interconnects; not in disk
cabling, nor in the disk cache, nor on the disk itself.  And integrity
in the presence of failures depends on every level of that system
working predictably in the failure modes you care about.

No filesystem can guarantee all of that; it's perfectly fine (even
required) to make assumptions about what guarantees the hardware must
provide in order for the filesystem to work correctly.  And if cheap
hardware perhaps fails to provide the same level of guarantee, then
that's perfectly acceptable --- just the same way that non-ECC DRAM
provides less assurances than ECC DRAM, and RAID0 provides less
protection than RAID1.

If you care about atomic writes, then it's probably OK just to assume
that the disk provides them, and state that ensuring that property in
the presence of power failures is the responsibility of the hardware.
Doing more requires deep understanding of the failure modes and
attention to each possible case.

btw, I haven't been very deeply involved in storage for a number of
years now, so I'm not the best expert; but there is definitely ongoing
work in this area, eg. current T10 (scsi specification) work on
providing multi-sector atomicity guarantees.

Thanks,
 Stephen